Add filesystem catalog docs + deprecate grpc services (#214)
aklivity/zilla-docs: src/reference/config/catalogs/catalog-filesystem.md

---
shortTitle: filesystem
description: Zilla runtime filesystem catalog
category:
  - Catalog
---

# filesystem Catalog

> ::: important Feature is in Incubator

Reviewer: is this catalog going to be in incubator or enabled in the full release?

Author: @jfallows I think this question is yours.

> ::: important Feature is in Incubator
> Read how to [enable incubator features](../../../how-tos/install.md#enable-incubator-features). Star and watch the [Zilla repo](https://github.com/aklivity/zilla/releases) for new releases!
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::: important Feature is in Incubator
Read how to [enable incubator features](../../../how-tos/deploy-operate.md#enable-incubator-features). Star and watch the [Zilla repo](https://github.com/aklivity/zilla/releases) for new releases!
:::
```

Zilla runtime filesystem catalog

```yaml {2}

> catalogs:
>   catalog0:
>     type: filesystem
>     options:
>       subjects:
>         petstore:
>           url: schema.yaml

Reviewer: Better to use more reader-friendly names
```suggestion
catalogs:
  my_catalog:
    type: filesystem
    options:
      subjects:
        my_local_file:
          url: path/to/local_file.txt
```

```

## Summary

Defines a catalog with schemas, AsyncAPI/OpenAPI definitions or proto files pulled from the filesystem relative `zilla.yaml` to enforce validation, create APIs or gRPC services.

## Configuration

:::: note Properties

- [options](#options)
  - [options.subjects\*](#options-subjects)
    - [subjects.url\*](#subjects-url)
    - [subjects.version](#subjects-version)

::: right
\* required
:::

::::

### options

> `object`

#### options.subjects\*

> `object` as map of named objects

Unique identifier for artifact categorization in the catalog.

> ##### subjects.url\*

Reviewer: If this is a local or remote location then `url` is probably fine, but if we are going to limit it to the host filesystem then this should be `path` or `relative-path`?

Author: Right now readURL supports remote location as well. @jfallows , what do you think?

Reviewer 2: This should be `path` for `filesystem` catalog.

Internally, `readURL` is scheduled for removal.

> `string`

URL to access artifact from the filesystem. The URLs are relative to `zilla.yaml`.

> ##### subjects.version

Reviewer: How does the version concept work for the host filesystem?
